# SonarQube for Jenkins and BitBucket Integration


---

## 📌 Architecture Components Overview

| Component | Purpose |
|----------|---------|
| EC2 (RHEL) | Host for Jenkins & SonarQube |
| SonarQube | Code quality & security analysis |
| BitBucket | Source code repository |
| Jenkins | Executes pipeline & triggers Sonar scans |
| Database | SonarQube uses a DBMS to store results |

---

##  Overview

Using SonarQube requires a web server runing the SonarQube web based software, which is used to store results from a scan of source code for an application. Each application requires a unique identifier and this is used to store and display results, via the SonarQube web based interface. The actual scanning is accomplished using the SonarQube scanner, which can be invoked using common build tools, within a CI/CD pipeline. Results of scans are available via the web based interface.

---
## FPAC Implementation Summary

### SonarQube Web Based Interface

SonarQube is installed on the same EC2 server that is running Jenkins. The SonarQube web interface will be available as a URL, reachable from the USDA VPN. This will allow access to scan reports, generated by SonarQube.

### SonarQube Scanning

The SonarQube scanner will be available on the Jenkins server, configured in a manner that will allow the sonar-scanner to be utilized in a Jenkins CI/CD pipeline.

### Jenkins Web Hook

There will be a web hook URL, that will be hosted on the Jenkins server, which will allow the integration of BitBucket git events, with Jenkins CI/CD pipelines.

### BitBucket Integration

BitBucket git events, such as commiting code changes or approving a pull request, will invoke the Jenkins web hook. The call to the web hook will contain the id for the code commit, which is used to pull the code to the Jenkins server from BitBucket.

### Jenkins CI/CD Pipeline

The pipeline is called via a web hook, this will provide the commit identifier which is used to pull the correct version of the source code from BitBucket. The Jenkins CI/CD pipeline will run the sonar-scanner tool, with parameters related to the particular data pipeline code that is being scanned. The example below is sonar-scanner command, assuming that the source code from BitBucket is available from the current directory used in the Jenkins CI/CD pipeline.

**Example configuration for sonar-scanner**
```
        sonar-scanner \ 
            -Dsonar.projectKey=carsdatapipeline \ 
            -Dsonar.sources=. \ 
            -Dsonar.host.url=http://<USDA FPAC SonarQube Address>:9000 \ 
            -Dsonar.token=cars-data-pipeline-sonar-qube-token 
```

### Jenkins access to BitBucket source code

The connection from Jenkins to BitBucket for pulling down the source code is critical. Documentation on this topic varies across tooling and plugins. What is essential is that the commit id provided by the web hook will result in a transfer of the source code to Jenkins. This is essential to the success of running the SonarQube scan. It is assumed that networking changes are required to enable this functionality.

### BitBucket access to Jenkins web hook

The connection between the Jenkins server and the BitBucket server, must allow traffic for the web hook. It is assumed that networking changes are required to enable this functionality.

### Jenkins CI/CD pipeline access to SonarQube URL

The SonarQube URL will allow the scanning tool to post the results of the scan, Jenkins CI/CD pipeline must be able to access this URL.

### SonarQube URL

The ability for users to access the SonarQube URL is critical for both configuring SonarQube and providing access to reports that provide the results of the scans. 

### SonarQube users

The best approach for user intergration with SonarQube web UI is a SAML based solution that integrates with the USDA PIV/CAC login. The level of effort for this integration is not known.

---

## FPAC Implementation Steps


### Install Software

Ensure that the SonarQube software is installed and available on the Jenkins server. The SonarQube community edition is a free download, available from this url: https://www.sonarsource.com/products/sonarqube/downloads/success-download-community-edition/ 

The scanner software for RHEL linux: 
wget https://binaries.sonarsource.com/Distribution/sonar-scanner-cli/sonar-scanner-6.1.0.4477-linux.zip



### Create Jenkins Web Hook

Create a web hook on Jenkins, that can be accessed by BitBucket. 

### Configure BitBucket

Add the Jenkins web hook to BitBucket and associate the web hook with an appropriate git event. 

### Configure SonarQube for each Data Pipeline

Using the SonarQube web UI, create the project and project token for each data pipeline in BitBucket. The data in the web hook, will contain the BitBucket project name, this should be the same as the SonarQube project name. The configuration data, as displayed in the example above, should be kept in a file in the root folder, within the project repository called: sonar-qube.sh. This file should have execute permissions, and will be used to run the sonar-scanner for that specific repository, with the proper configuration data. Using this approach will allow the code to be scanned and results posted for the correct repository, using a single Jenkins CI/CD deployment pipeline for all of the data pipelines.

### Enable all required network traffic

Enable the ability of the BitBucket server to call the Jenkins web hook. Enable the Jenkins server to access the source code from the BitBucket server. Enable the Jenkins CI/CD pipeline to access SonarQube URL.


### Enable users to access SonarQube UI

Users must have access to the SonarQube UI to provision data pipelines to scan and well as to access results of the scans.

---

## FPAC Implementation Challenges and Risks

